# Amazon Web Services Intro

## Amazon Web Services

Amazon Web Services (AWS) is one of the most popular cloud service providers and is widely credited with the introduction of innovative concepts in cloud computing. AWS offers various services such as Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) and Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2). For the projects in this course, you will work on instances provisioned on Amazon EC2 and utilize S3 for persistent storage. We will also be working with other AWS technologies such as Elastic Block Store (EBS) and CloudWatch, among others. For more information about AWS, please refer to the [AWS website](https://aws.amazon.com/).

[Video 1](https://youtu.be/jOhbTAU4OPI): Introduction to AWS

## AWS Authentication

Apart from your AWS account username/password, programmatic API access to AWS services can be granted using a AWS Access Key ID and AWS Secret Key pair. These are unique credentials that can be generated by the user and used within scripts and programs that interact with AWS services.

The process for creating IAM users is outlined in the AWS IAM documentation. To ensure you are following best security practices, create an IAM user which has access to the AWS console and required APIs:

1. Sign into the AWS Console
2. Select the IAM service under Security, Identity & Compliance
3. Select Users from the IAM console
4. Select Add User
5. In the first step of this workflow, provide a valid username and select Programmatic access
6. In step 2, select Attach existing policies directly. You may add AmazonS3FullAccess, AmazonEC2FullAccess, and any others you may need.
7. In step 3, review the User's policies and click Create user
8. In step 4, take note of the Users Access key ID and Secret access key as this is the only time they are accessible.

### Keeping your Keys Secure**

Your AWS keys have control over your AWS account, including the ability to launch, destroy and modify all types of AWS resources. The keys must be kept safe, preferably encrypted by password on your PC.

The safest method to reference the keys in your source code is to define them as environment variables:

```text
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_HERE"
export AWS_SECRET_KEY="YOUR_SECRET_KEY_HERE"
```

You can then access them from within your code, for example, using System.getenv("AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID") in Java, os.environ['AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID'] in Python, or ${AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID} in Bash.

## AWS Management Console

[Video 2](https://youtu.be/EfnfcIqq_IU): AWS Management Console
